## Development & Deploy

### Prerequisites

You will need the following tools to build and deploy kapp-controller: 
* ytt
* kbld
* kapp

For linux/mac users, all the tools below can be installed by running `./hack/install-deps.sh`.

For windows users, please download the binaries from the respective GitHub repositories:
* https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/carvel-ytt
* https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/carvel-kbld
* https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/carvel-kapp

### Build

To build the kapp-controller project locally, run the following:
```
./hack/build.sh
```

### Deploy

The kapp-controller source can be built and deployed to a Kubernetes cluster using one of the options below.

#### minikube 

```
eval $(minikube docker-env)
./hack/deploy.sh
```

#### Non-minikube environment

1. Change the [push_images property](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/carvel-kapp-controller/blob/develop/config/values.yml#L10) to true
2. Change the [image_repo property](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/carvel-kapp-controller/blob/develop/config/values.yml#L12) to the location to push the kapp-controller image
3. Run `./hack/deploy.sh`

#### secretgen-controller for private auth workflows

See more on kapp-controller's integration with secretgen-controller [here](https://carvel.dev/kapp-controller/docs/latest/private-registry-auth/).

```
# deploys secretgen-controller with kapp-controller
export KAPPCTRL_E2E_SECRETGEN_CONTROLLER=true

# use one of the methods above for where/how to deploy kapp-controller
./hack/deploy.sh
```

### Testing

kapp-controller has unit tests and e2e tests that can be run as documented below.

#### Unit Testing

```
./hack/test.sh
```

#### e2e Testing

```
# deploy kapp-controller to cluster with test assets
./hack/deploy-test.sh

# namespace where tests will be run on cluster
export KAPPCTRL_E2E_NAMESPACE=kappctrl-test

# run e2e test suite
./hack/test-all.sh
```

### Troubleshooting tips

1. If testing against a `minikube` cluster, run `eval $(minikube docker-env)` before development.

   This prevents the following error, which is a result of the docker daemon being unable to pull the `kapp-controller` dev image.

```
11:01:16AM:     ^ Pending: ImagePullBackOff (message: Back-off pulling image "kbld:kapp-controller-sha256-1bb8a9169c8265defc094a0220fa51d8c69a621d778813e4c4567d8cabde0e45")
11:01:05AM:     ^ Pending: ErrImagePull (message: rpc error: code = Unknown desc = Error response from daemon: pull access denied for kbld, repository does not exist or may require 'docker login': denied: requested access to the resource is denied)
```

### Release

Release versions are scraped from git tags in the same style as the goreleaser
tool.

Tag the release - it's necessary to do this first because the release process uses the latest tag to record the version.
```
git tag "v1.2.3"
```

Push the tag to GitHub.
```
git push --tags
```

After pushing the tag to GitHub, the release process will be carried out by a GitHub workflow. 
This workflow will:
* Build and push the kapp-controller container image to ghcr.io
* Generate the release YAML (i.e. `release.yml`)
* Create a GitHub release draft 
* Upload `release.yml` to the GitHub release

After the release process finishes successfully, you can view the newly drafted release via 
the GitHub UI [here](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/carvel-kapp-controller/releases). 

The newly published release will be available as a Draft (i.e. not available to the public).
Release notes can be autogenerated by GitHub, but make sure to call attention to any points 
that are not immediately clear from the autogenerated notes. Make sure to always thank external 
contributors for their additions to kapp-controller in the release notes.

Once the release notes are ready, clicking the `Publish release` button in the GitHub UI to 
make the release available to users.

#### Release development process 

If you are making changes to the release process and want to test the process, it is recommended 
to work on a fork of kapp-controller instead of against the repository in the vmware-tanzu organization.

To do this, you can start by forking this repository. 

Next, head to the `Actions` tab of the fork you are using and enable GitHub Actions to run 
against this fork (i.e. By default, Actions do not run against forked repositories). 

Change the [`config-release/values.yml`](../config-release/values.yml) to point to your forked repository by changing 
`image_repo: ghcr.io/vmware-tanzu/carvel-kapp-controller` to `image_repo: ghcr.io/<YOUR GitHub USERNAME>/carvel-kapp-controller`.

After these steps have been carried out, you can trigger the release process by pushing a tag 
to your forked repository.

Some files to make note of when working on the release process:
* [`./hack/build-release.sh`](../hack/build-release.sh)
  - build-release.sh uses kbld and ytt to build and push the kapp-controller image to ghcr.io 
   and also generates the kapp-controller release.yml
* [`.github/workflows/release.yml`](../.github/workflows/release.yml)
  - GitHub Action workflow for release process

### Packaging Development

Due to the fact the one of our resources is named package, which is a golang
keyword, we were not able to use the code-generation binaries. To get around
this, we generated the code using the name pkg, and then manually edited those
files to enable us to use the name package. To avoid breaking this code, we are
commenting out the gen script on the packaging branch for extra safety. We will
have to come up with a long term solution to enable us to use the
code-generation binaries again.
